# Project Description
*What is the overarching purpose of your research project, and why is it an important undertaking?*

- The purpose of the research project is to investigate hate crimes data to better understand relationships between an area’s demographics and socioeconomic levels and incidence of hate crimes. It is an important undertaking because better understanding this data would help us in acknowledging the current trends and common motivations behind hate crimes. Using insights from our analyses, we can then predict hate crime rates based on the appropriate socioeconomic factors.

*How does your research fit into the broader problem domain? You should cite at least 3 papers that help contextualize your research.*

- Throughout history, many sociologists have published theories on how social inequality is associated with crimes. Even back in 1947, Edwin Sutherland argued that there are less crimes in “egalitarian, consensual societies” compared to “inequitable societies characterized by conflicting beliefs”. More recently, in their paper, “Divergent Social Worlds: Neighborhood Crime and the Racial-Spatial Divide”, authors Peterson and Krivo found that whites and non-whites “live in divergent socioeconomic worlds generated by racialized social structures, which in turn produce socioeconomic differences and ultimately differences in crime rates”.
[link](http://faculty.washington.edu/matsueda/Papers/Inequality.pdf)
- From 2004 to 2015, the U.S. Department of Justice reported that “U.S. residents experienced an average of 250,000 hate crime victimizations each year”. These include, but are not limited to, assault, sexual assault, rape, robbery, and other types of theft. Also during this same period, 46% of the violent crimes that occured happened in the Western region of the U.S., with urban areas being a high target.
[link](https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/hcv0415.pdf)
- Hate crimes are an ongoing problem that don’t seem to be on the decline. In fact, hate crimes in the U.S.’s top ten largest cities increased 12.5% in 2017. Apparently, this “increase was the fourth consecutive annual rise in a row and the highest total in over a decade”. Racial bias is one of the most common motivations crimes from 2011-2015, and in 2017, the most common crimes were committed by those that were anti-Black, anti-Semitic, anti-gay, and anti-Latino.
[link](https://csbs.csusb.edu/sites/csusb_csbs/files/2018%20Hate%20Final%20Report%205-14.pdf)

*What specific hypothesis (hypotheses) are you going to test?*
To test which socioeconomic features are most correlated with hate crimes we will test the following null hypotheses:
- There is no significant difference between the gini index and the rate of hate crimes in a state.
- There is no significant difference between median household income and rate of hate crimes in a state.
- There is no significant difference between the proportion of non-white population and rate of hate crimes in a state.
- There is no significant difference between the proportion of unemployed individuals and the rate of hate crimes in a state.

*What are the datasets you'll be working with to answer this question? Please include relevant background describing the datasets you identify.*

- [Hate crime data](https://ucr.fbi.gov/hate-crime/2016?fbclid=IwAR1XrwBRWJ40IyGjTS5iVbL6BGAhZEr3mCFthpispOog7p4zMfIGSL0jGy0) from the FBI that includes data about hate crime incidents, including motivations, victims, offenders, locations, and rates by jurisdiction. The source of their data is Uniform Crime Reporting from local governments.

- [Hate crime data](https://github.com/fivethirtyeight/data/tree/master/hate-crimes?fbclid=IwAR0QCVEZ251T-gjpKoidETkvmS3ohND_Wk21TmlD_vg7mdNNgRXJLkwQRpY) from fivethirtyeight, which includes hate crime rates, as well as other demographic data such as median household income, rate of non white residents, rate of voters who voted for Trump, and more. The sources of their data are the Kaiser Family Foundation, the Census Bureau, the United States Elections Project, the Southern Poverty Law Center, and the FBI.

*What statistical and machine learning methods do you plan on using to test your hypothesis?*
- Multivariate linear regression to test the correlation between crime rates and our socioeconomic variables of interest, which includes gini index, median household income, proportion of non-white population, and the proportion of unemployed individuals.

*Who is your target audience for the resource you will build? Depending on the domain of your data, there may be a variety of audiences interested in using the dataset. You should hone in on one of these audiences.*

- _Target Audience_: Law enforcement/government - to better understand some of the trends and motivations behind hate crimes that are happening in the country. States that have high hate crime rates can improve training for law enforcement officers to better handle these situations
- _Secondary Audience_: Communities - all people can use this resource to better understand what is happening in their community and can work to improve their communities through advocacy and education

*What should your audience learn from your resource?
Consider specific questions they may want to answer.*
- Which states have the most hate crime?
- What are the most salient motivations for increased hate crimes?
- What are the most common types of hate crimes carried out against different groups of people?
- Which socioeconomic variables are correlated with hate crimes?

# Technical Description
*What will be the format of your final web resource (Shiny app, HTML page or slideshow compiled with KnitR, etc.)?*

- We will be creating a Shiny app which will allow our audience to interact with the results of our analysis.

*Do you anticipate any specific data collection / data management challenges?*
- We may run into challenges in combining the two datasets we are interested in. This will depend on how closely the datasets align and what data comes from each dataset.
- As for data management, we must also determine the best way to deal with missing/NaN values as well as outliers. For example, if we simply remove the NaN and outlier values, we may be removing data that is fundamental to our analysis.

*What new technical skills will need to learn in order to complete your project?*

- We will need to refresh our skills on building a final web resource as we are choosing to create a Shiny app. We may need to learn new techniques for creating visualizations, especially related to plotting points on a map.

*How will you conduct your analysis? Please include a detailed description of your intended modeling approach.*

- In order to use multivariate linear analysis, we must conduct a correlation analysis with every dependent variable to understand the relationship between those variables and the independent variable. If the relationships are not linear, we may need to change our modeling approach. We must also run bivariate correlation analysis with each predictor to understand how they relate to one another.

- Using stepwise forward selection, we will select the best predictor variables that maximize both the regular and adjusted R2 value. Using this formula, we can then create the statistical model.

- Once the model is created, we can test its predictive accuracy by creating a plot that compares the observed and predicted value as well as examining how much variance in the observed value is explained by the model (R2).

*What major challenges do you anticipate?*
- We may run into multicollinearity between different variables which, if considerable enough, makes the variable coefficients insignificant and difficult to interpret. To counter this, we can try remove highly correlated predictors from the model.
